---
title: "rules"
bg: purple
color: white
fa-icon: handshake-o
---

## Eligibility

Any currently enrolled students in grades 9-12 are eligible to compete in
the high school division, and any students currently enrolled as
undergraduate students at a college or university are eligible to
compete in the college division. Any team with a mix of both high school
and college students must compete in the college division.

## Teams

-   Each team consists of up to three contestants.

-   All teams and contestants must be registered by the deadline to
    ensure sufficient time to create the necessary accounts on the
    online judging platform.

-   It may be possible to accommodate some last-minute changes in
    contestants and team composition, but any such changes must be
    communicated to the judges as soon as possible.

## Equipment

-   Each team is only allowed a **single** computer that all team
    members must share during the contest.

-   Each team must bring their own computer.

-   If desired, teams may bring additional hardware such as extra
    monitors, external keyboards or mice.

-   Teams should also plan to bring writing implements, scratch paper,
    *etc.*

-   Each team will be provided a table, three chairs, and multiple power
    outlets.

-   Use of all other electronic devices (phones, smart watches, tablets,
    *etc.*) during the contest is forbidden. These devices should be
    left with a coach for the duration of the contest.

-   Use of non-electronic resources (books, printouts, *etc.*) is
    unrestricted.

## Internet

-   Internet access during the contest is **allowed**, for example, to
    access pre-written code in a GitHub repository, to research
    algorithms and data structures, *etc.*

-   However, team members may not use the Internet to communicate with
    any non-team members during the contest.

## AI

Use of AI tools such as GitHub Copilot to generate code is forbidden;
teams should ensure that any integrated AI assistance in their IDEs is
turned off for the duration of the contest. All code submitted by a team
during the contest must either be (1) written by team members during the
contest, or (2) copied from a publicly available source on the internet
(*e.g.* a blog post, github repository, *etc.*).

## Languages

-   Programming languages allowed during the contest are Python 3, Java,
    C, C++, Rust, and Haskell. However, it is not guaranteed that all
    languages will be equally suitable for solving every problem.

-   For more information on the precise language versions supported and
    which libraries are installed in the judging environment, consult
    <https://open.kattis.com/languages>.

-   Teams do not have to commit to any single language. Each individual
    problem submission may use whichever language a team chooses.

## Problems

-   There will be about 8-10 problems in each division, with some
    overlap between the divisions.

-   All the problems will be freshly created, never-before-published
    problems, with a wide range of difficulties.

-   The problems can be attempted in any order; in fact, the problems
    will not be arranged in any particular order, so you should not
    assume the easiest problems will be listed first.

-   Each problem may be attempted any number of times.

-   For a sample of the types of problems to expect, see
    <https://open.kattis.com>.

## Judging platform

-   <https://open.kattis.com/> will be used as the judging platform
    during the contest (see <https://open.kattis.com/info> for more
    specific information). It will test submitted solutions in real
    time, and display a public scoreboard (accessible to both
    contestants and spectators) with the problems solved by each team.

-   The public scoreboard will be frozen with one hour remaining in the
    contest.

-   It will also be possible to submit clarification questions via the
    judging system, to be answered by the contest judges.

-   <https://open.kattis.com/info/submit> has information on an
    automatic command-line submission script; it is acceptable, but not
    necessary, for teams to get this script set up ahead of time.

## Scoring

-   Team ranking is first determined by number of problems correctly
    solved.

-   Teams tied on number of problems solved will be ranked according to
    total solve time, with the lowest total solve time ranked highest.

    -   For each problem that is correctly solved, the total solve time
        will increase by the number of minutes from the start of the
        contest to the time of the correct submission, plus twenty
        minutes per incorrect submission for that problem.

    -   Note that incorrect submissions for a problem only incur a
        20-minute penalty if and when that problem is correctly solved.

    -   For example, suppose a team makes the submissions in the table
        shown below, where the first column shows the time in
        minutes elapsed from the start of the contest, the second column
        shows the problem submitted, and the third column indicates
        whether the submission was judged to be correct.

        | Time&nbsp;&nbsp; | Problem&nbsp;&nbsp; | Correct? |
        |:----------------:|:-------------------:|:--------:|
        | 12               | A                   | Y        |
        | 26               | B                   | N        |
        | 28               | B                   | N        |
        | 39               | C                   | N        |
        | 51               | B                   | Y        |

    -   So far, the team has solved two problems correctly (A and B),
        and their total solve time is 103 (12 minutes for problem A,
        plus 51 minutes for problem B, plus 40 minutes for the two
        incorrect submissions for problem B). The incorrect submission
        for problem C does not yet count towards the total solve time
        (but it will if the team eventually solves problem C correctly).

